welcome to topcast and to my third
episode analyzing some writing on the
topic of objectivism in the first
episode I analyzed Ein Rand in her own
words directly from her work
introduction to objectivist epistemology
and in the second I began to analyze an
objectivist scholar who has read and
written widely on objectivism and in
terms of epistemology has attempted to
clarify and perhaps take further some of
rand's own work now I've produced
podcasts and written articles before
about well manner of things from
Bayesian epistemology socialism
environmentalism even religion some of
the controversial topics of our time but
few topics generate the style of
response I get when I speak about the
epistemology of objectivism now from
afar I've already noticed this when it
comes to economics people do wear their
economic theories somewhat religiously
this can be unfortunate what I mean by
this is that people think they know
their own side but they don't take much
time to understand the counter claims
being made and why they are being made
as John Stuart Mill said quote he who
knows only his own side of the case
knows little of that his reasons may be
good and no one may have been able to
refute them but if he is equally unable
to refute the reasons on the opposite
side if it is not so much as know what
they are he has no ground for preferring
either option nor is it enough that he
should hear the opinions of adversaries
from his own teachers presented as they
State them and accompanied by what they
offer as refutations he must be able to
hear them from persons who actually
believe them he must know them in their
most plausible and persuasive form end
quote so yes that famous way in which he
began he who knows only his own side of
the case knows little of that this is
what I'm trying to do I'm trying to
follow what Mill implaus us there to do
I'm not merely listening to the people
on my side of the case when it comes to
objectivist epistemology I'm going to
iron Rand I'm going to her supporters
I'm quoting her at length I think her
support is at length I think and I'm
going to bring in a yet a third person
today who actually wrote a book about
the use of induction supposedly in
physics who is also an objectivist and a
vowed objectivist now aside from my
episodes on objectivist epistemology
perhaps there is one other topic that
has generated a similar visceral
response in people that's when I speak
plainly about the need for infinite
progress and its implications in other
words claims like we need more people
and that in the main more people are
almost entirely upside and the reason
being people are the sole Originators of
explanatory knowledge which is to say AI
Solutions and hence progress
they people are not sources of problems
they're sources of solutions and the
solutions are the sources of better
problems whose Solutions will be found
by people and people are first and
foremost producers and creators not
consumers and destroyers and so that
that whole perspective that I've just
said there that I've just outlined that
really upsets people and so I get a lot
of response when I say things like that
but one needs to take time to understand
the environmentalists perspective on
these things and the malthusian impulse
and the arguments that Malthus and his
descendants his intellectual descendants
have made and then you need to have
explanations why those arguments are
wrong you need to understand them in the
first place although in the case of
environmentalism it is relatively easy
to come by all those arguments after all
we're saturated in them in the media and
everywhere else every newspaper you pick
up has some explanation each day about
the evils of people and the
environmentalist movement and the
importance of it is the culture in which
we swim it's the Zeitgeist and if you
just went to school after about 1970
perhaps even a bit before you were
indoctrinated with all that stuff so
people who managed to get out of it
Heroes of a kind everyone is now an
expert in environmentalism more or less
once they've graduated high school
because they've experienced a 12-year
course of it
all the way from the first year of
Infant School through to the day they
graduate high school they are saturated
with lessons on environmentalism the
evils of people
how the world is going to hell in a hand
basket all that sort of stuff that's
environmentalism epistemology on the
other hand is totally different we do
manage to build a folk epistemology and
often our Common Sense use of words like
no know tracks how it entails
fallibility and the containing of Errors
my go-to example is of course that the
high school student who studied some
basic physics well no Newton's law of
gravity it forms part of their knowledge
once they've learned it even when they
later learn it is strictly false they
still know it it still counts as
knowledge and they can still say I know
it and also I know it to be false it is
only an academic philosophizing the
linguistic gymnastics begin to deny this
Common Sense meaning of knowledge and
what it is to know something they say
knowledge must be some kind of Justified
true belief of course Newton's law of
gravity known false cannot be true so
should not be believed and thus no one
is Justified in saying they believe it
if they know it's false and it cannot be
justified by any process anyway so
common sense tracks what popper
explained about knowledge but not what
the other intellectuals explain about
how knowledge works I get it all wrong I
overthink it so I've spent time reading
Papa's critics and I've read iron Rand
and I've quoted Ayn Rand and one of her
supporters so far bring in a third today
but people say I'm still misinterpreting
her I have not thus far had anyone quote
myself back to me no one has refuted
anything in papyrian epistemology so far
using some specific quotes or examples
no one has explained the flaw in my
examples of how we know about what
Stellar nuclear fusion is or what
dinosaurs are that we observe none of
those so-called facts of reality and yet
I'm reading comments and tweets of the
kind re-explaining Rand in their own
words which leads to a further
proliferation of interpretation of Rand
which somehow makes my point for me that
even with things like what someone wrote
in black and white is still
interpretation all the way down but
anyways at least one Tweeter remarked I
am grossly misunderstanding the written
word and spreading misinformation so
that's fun
I'm also reading in my multiple DMs I
did not read enough or quote enough from
Rand and I spent too much time
explaining popper I should have been
explaining more about Rand which is kind
of a damned if you do and a damned if
you don't kind of critique some
listeners I guess would have preferred
simply me reading the entirety of an
objectivist paper or a book without
commentary or maybe just with some
approving sounds
so anyways my point here is that there
is something special in this respect
about objectivism my diagnosis isn't
this will upset the objectivists is that
that epistemology having the particular
form that it does turns it into a system
of belief to be defended one
interlocutor on social media basically
agreed and said yes it is and this is a
virtue of it and we should defend the
truth which begs the question of course
my real concern is no one quotes papa no
one quotes him back to me the favor is
simply never returned there is a talk on
YouTube for example by Don Watkins and
Jason Ryan's objectivists I've watched
where those objectivists critique Papa
but I've never bothered to do much more
than watch it because they are focused
narrowly on falsification and
essentially reduce poppers epistemology
like almost all his critics ever have to
that one concept and they barely quote
him at all there's nothing about
objective knowledge problems and
solutions conjectures and refutations
and so on so my whole problem there and
you know trying to respond at length to
something like those guys would be well
I'd be charged with the crime of Simply
explaining too much popper again in my
critique of the objectivist perspective
but that's the thing about conjectural
knowledge in proper sense knowledge is
critical it's critical which means that
once you have some knowledge you have an
explanation it's a criticism of all the
other Alternatives out there so in
explaining proper epistemology what I am
doing is critiquing every other
epistemology including iron's
objectivism that's the whole point point
the whole point and the purpose of
epistemology is that something like
general relativity serves as a critique
of all other theories of gravity
including Newtons and they all come up
short shown false by experiment but
refuted by the existence of the
explanation the scientific explanation
of gravity so too with neo-darwinism it
is a critique of every other theory of
how speciation occurs the variety of
life on Earth name your theory regarding
it as a critical piece of knowledge
means it is a criticism it exists as a
criticism of all the other knowledge we
have out there it's a conjecture and
it's criticism all in one that's what
that's what knowledge is and in the case
of where we say this is the explanation
of something it's a successful criticism
it's a successful criticism of the
Alternatives okay Newton can be a
criticism of other Newtonian gravity can
be a criticism of other theories of
gravity under preparing epistemology
it's just that it fails in doing so it
can't achieve a successful criticism of
Einstein it fails in being able to do
that it's not a valid criticism why
because it fails to account for a whole
wide variety of phenomena that the
bending of Starlight during solar
eclipses the procession of Mercury's
orbit gravitational waves and behavior
of black holes and neutron stars and
technically speaking the orbits of all
other planets and the GPS system and so
on and so forth so whatever the case
today I'm up to part two of my
discussion of Thomas mioves paper on
induction I'm going to get there uh
David Deutsch asked me after the first
episode I I did on this a simple
question when it comes to objectivism
I'll just paraphrase the the question he
asked me the question was
under objectivism is the force of
gravity a concept well it's a great
question that's brilliant now of course
what I'd say is this is this is one of
the problems with the abstract nature of
the way Rand and other objectivists to
write about epistemology we don't get
down to Brass tax so to speak although
today I will be providing some
commentary on one objectivist who tries
to talk about examples from history the
history of physics and that's good gets
it all wrong of course you know spoiler
alert but at least we have something
some meat on the bones we can talk about
we don't get that from Rand we're not
getting that from Thomas and almost
anyone else but but on this question
okay on this question of is the force of
gravity a concept under Iran's
objectivism is the force of gravity a
concept let's say they do think it's a
concept let's say the answer is yes the
force of gravity is a concept according
to Rand well then what we have is a
concept that is entirely fictitious
because there is no force of of gravity
we know that now Einstein's general
relativity explains what gravity is and
it's the curvature of space-time it's
not a force so then Concepts knowledge
can be false under objectivism but how
does that happen if concepts are just
induced from the facts of reality and
the facts of reality cannot contain
falsehood how did we get falsehood from
truth is it because reason is fallible
in which case we have conjectural
knowledge we have popular in
epistemology just with the unnecessary
philosophical baggage of by the way we
also observe the facts of reality but
they serve no actual purpose in being
called as such or being starting points
because where we end up is false
knowledge anyways okay so maybe they say
no no the the force of gravity does not
count as a concept because it's known to
be false well okay but presumably in the
18th and 19th century it did count as
knowledge because it stood in relation
to people then as any unrefuted
explanation today or con content of an
unrefuted explanation today stands in
relation to people right now so somehow
the forces of gravity transitioned from
being a true concept to a false concept
so again we have a conjecture and a
false one a refutation showing it false
again no function for The observed facts
of reality Newton merely conjectured an
explanation of gravity it's important to
keep in mind Newton postulated a
physical Force he wasn't merely making
predictions he was making a substantial
Claim about what reality consists of he
didn't know what the cause of the force
was just as it was this attractive thing
how exactly it worked he didn't know but
okay he still said it existed though
yeah it existed and newtonians after him
and physicists say well you know
according to this Theory it implies a
force didn't imply the curvature of
space-time okay there's a different
physical things there's the sense in
which one strictly contradicts the other
it's not merely about contradictory
predictions or that's part of it that's
how you go about measuring the
differences between these things and
ultimately the falsification happens but
they're postulating the existence of
things in reality either the forces
there in reality or it's not the
curvature of space is there this
space-time thing is really there and can
warp and bend or not okay it's just like
saying giraffes exist or not the force
of gravity exists or not okay you can't
have it both ways it's not like Newton's
a little bit true on that point
he's not it's not true it's not he's not
right anyway in either case whether the
the force of gravity exists as a concept
or a dozen there exists there must exist
misconceptions right Which is popular
into the core nothing was being induced
or insofar as it is induced then this
use of this word induced or induction is
simply conjecturing an explanation and
it is a fallible process error prone and
the lesson of Newton is the lesson for
all knowledge everywhere all the time it
could be false it's always conjectural
and it cannot possibly be induced from
The observed facts of reality because if
it was then we'd have certain knowledge
we'd have the facts of reality the truth
we don't because reality can always
contradict your so-called facts of
reality so how could there have been
facts in the first place unless as I
explained in the last episode the facts
come at the end of the process once you
have this explanation this conjectured
explanation then from those you can
derive certain facts you can derive
certain effects so you have this the big
theory of particle physics and from that
you derive certain facts like you know
electrons have a particular Mass that's
a fact or a particular spin or a charge
you know electrons have a negative
charge that's a fact that comes at the
end of the process of figuring out what
these things are the big Grand
explanation you don't start with
electrons a negative you don't even know
they exist yet you don't know what they
are okay you detect negative charge we
don't know they're electrons we don't
know they're particles this is that they
were originally cathode rays anyway one
could just replace the force of gravity
with something like species or group
selection and evolution it's group
selection and evolution a concept under
objectivism I mean even today people
will claim that what is happening in
darwinian evolution by natural selection
is that individuals within a species are
being selected for or against or even
group selection is a thing but now we
know what the unit of selection is the
sole unit of selection it's the gene you
do hear some people people intellectuals
prominent podcasters scientifically
minded mind you wanting seemingly to be
some kind of political Centrist on this
point by explaining Evolution as some
mix of gene or individual or species or
group selection as if the debate is
still going on well you know what can
you do now before I begin the readings
as I say from Thomas the other matter on
my agenda today is that I was implored
to read a particular book people just
said well you've got to read this book
you've got to read this objectivist Tome
that that will answer all your questions
and the title of it is quote The Logical
leap induction in physics end quote by
an objectivist called David haraman and
with a forward by Leonard peacock in one
one of the great luminaries of
objectivism so I got the book and I read
sections and I'm sorry to say nothing
new did not persuade me I went straight
to the parts I was really interested in
you know how how did universal
gravitation come about and how do we how
do we marry up the existence of Newton's
Theory with Einstein's theory what does
he say about that because whatever is
said about that tells me the whole story
about what this fellow thinks about how
knowledge is constructed so we're going
to go through that section now before
that well let's go to what he said about
popper okay word search on popper of
course he comes up well it's complete
Hatchet job of course as you would
expect he doesn't get quoted uh his name
appears twice in the text here it is
I'll read the the passage in full this
is the complete treatment by Mr David
Harryman and his book all about the use
of induction and physics this is what he
says about popper the sum total quote
during the past Century however many
philosophers have rejected the validity
of induction and argued that every
generalization is an error for example
Karl Popper claimed that all the laws of
Kepler Galileo and Newton have been
falsified by demanding that a true
generalization must apply with unlimited
Precision to an unlimited domain popper
upheld a mystical view of truth that is
forever outside the reach of man and
accessible only to an omniscient God in
the end he was left with two types of
generalizations those that have been
proven false and those that will be
proven false he was then accused by
later philosophers of being too
optimistic they insisted that nothing
can be proven not even a
generalization's falsehood end quote
that's it that's it that the entire book
which is 300 and something Pages that's
what you get about popper not one quote
from his work nothing just assertions
about what he thought that's the
standard of scholarship we've got here
Papa did not claim all the laws of
Newton have been falsified as claimed
there and he did not say everything will
be proven false that's not the
epistemology the fact that knowledge
contains error yes sure does not mean we
will find it and therefore prove it
false and anyway this word proven proven
proven's the wrong word and then the
author wants to link popper to
relativists or Skeptics it's just
completely ignorant it's not fair in the
same way that the fact that I keep
saying the favor is not return the
objectivists are not connecting with
quotes pull out some quotes pull out
some quotes and take exception to them
fine let's explain popper in his own
words summary probably of a summary in
fact well he does link to a reference to
objective knowledge but it's just a book
there's no page number but let's go on
to the meat of the matter so to speak
the book this book then goes on to
explain how Newton discovered universal
gravitation the book provides a history
of what Newton used universal
gravitation to do in predicting tides
and shapes of orbits and he just asserts
that the move from Kepler's laws to an
inverse Square law is induction and
further in a chapter called Discovery is
proof the claim is that the mathematical
proof of the inverse Square law of
gravitation amounts to its Discovery at
no point do we concern ourselves with
the fact that it is strictly false
refuted by experiment the author writes
on this quote a rigorous process of
inductive logic enabled Newton to climb
from narrower generalizations to his
fundamental laws end quote we're never
told what this inductive logic is
exactly the description offered is
perfectly consistent with Newton
conjecturing the explosion he goes on to
say quote the author says quote for
example he did not leap to the law of
universal gravitation and then search
for confirming instances rather as we
saw he began by identifying the nature
of the soul of force on the planets in
the principia he then showed that a
similar force is exerted by Jupiter and
Saturn on their respective moons and he
therefore had a law pertaining to both
planets and moons he next showed that a
similar force is exerted by Earth on
both terrestrial bodies and our moon and
he therefore had a law that applied to
all bodies on Earth's surface as well as
planets and moons he then showed that
the attractive forces not merely exerted
by Earth as a whole but it is exerted
independently by every bit of of matter
making up the Earth his analysis of
Earth's shape and procession and the
ocean tides provided important evidence
for this conclusion end quote okay so he
showed proved or induced our complete
falsehood because there is no such a
force and he came up with the law no
not by looking at the instances where it
worked in these different places and
then generalizing to the law no he had
the general law and then realized that
necessarily it applied everywhere
throughout the entire universe so of
course to each of those places each of
those instances where it applied anyway
the author goes on today quote if at the
end Newton had been asked now that you
have this Theory how are you going to
prove it he could answer simply by
pointing to the Discovery process itself
the step-by-step logical sequence by
which he arrived at his theory is the
proof each step was the grasp of a
causal Connection by the mathematical
processing of observational data since
there were no arbitrary leaps there is
no problem of justifying them end quote
so according to the author therefore
Newton's theory of gravity is proved and
Justified and yet it's false which is
interesting I wonder how the author goes
about squaring this circle they've got
to mention Einstein eventually right and
they do so let's read what is said
here we go strap yourself in quote
the major axis of Mercury's orbit is
observed to rotate very slowly as seen
from Earth the total rotation appears to
be about 1.56 degrees per Century
calculations show that almost 90 percent
of this apparent rotation is caused by
the procession of the Earth's spin axis
which is entirely explained by Newton's
theory of the remaining effect more than
90 percent is caused by the
gravitational pull of the other planets
which is also explained by Newton's
theory that leaves less than one percent
of the total observed effect which
amounts to 43 Arc seconds per Century
unexplained by Newton's Theory
this residual effect is explained by
Einstein's theory the predictions of
which differ slightly from Newtons in
the strong gravitational field near the
sun end quote
so he's completely confused prediction
with explanation he's saying that well
most of Mercury's orbit is explained by
Newton's Theory the residual left over
is explained by Einstein's theory but
the explanation in Newton's theory is a
force the existence of a force so he's
saying well almost all of it is
explained by this force of gravity it's
just the residual that we use the
curvature of space-time for which isn't
a force
what is he talking about how can you
both explain the same thing by recourse
to force and not a force simultaneously
it's a strict contradiction
doesn't work at all prediction okay even
then where it's a bit dodgy we can
predict the entirety of Newton of of
Mercury's orbit the entirety of them by
recourse to general relativity we never
have to bring in Newton's Law at all we
don't in fact no no no astrophysicist
worth their salt is going to try and
predict where Mercury is going to be in
fact any other planet it's precisely
speaking you're not going to use
Newton's Theory not in this day and age
if you want highly precise predictions
of where those things are going to be
you're going to use general relativity
you're going to use a computer but you
know program with general relativity to
get the position exactly right so no no
Mercury is orbit is entirely explained
by Einstein's theory entirely otherwise
it would be like saying well you know
much of the life on Earth can be
explained by creationism or spontaneous
generation some of the Rest by
lamarckism and then a little bit left
over is evolution by natural selection
I mean how do we explain how GPS works
most of it being explained by Newton's
Theory and the rest being explained by
general relativity I mean Google Maps
will tell you you're right outside the
post office when in fact you're standing
in the middle of a field if we use
Newtonian gravity for it but hey well
how about gravitational waves it is not
that Newton's gravity is true in some
domain or not it's true or not surely
the objectivist can agree with that I
know they talk about contextual
knowledge but contextual truth that's
relativist if anything is the fact is
Newton's theory is not true it works in
some places because it's an
approximation containing some truth but
strictly false it's an approximation to
reality not reality approximations to
reality are not reality they are not the
truth and even where it works Newton's
Theory it never works exactly Newton's
Theory the predictions looked at it high
enough resolution do not correspond
exactly to where any of the planets are
Mercury is just a spectacular case in
point so there we have it most of
Mercury's orbit is explained by Newton
and just the remainder just the
correction is explained by Einstein so
what this means taken literally is most
of Mercury's orbit is explained by an
inverse Square law
for Force it's explained by a force and
the remainder is explained not by an
inverse Square law but by a metric and
tenses and the curvature of space time
so how does reality know what to invoke
and when how does it know that well for
now gravity is a force and now for the
remainder it's the curvature of space
something that's all wrong
it's all the curvature of space-time
that's what gravity is that's how we
explain not merely predict explain
what's going on not merely with the
procession of Mercury's orbit which is
the example being used here but all
orbits all falling objects all Tides
every single gravitational effect is a
manifestation of the curvature of
space-time it has nothing to do with the
force it has nothing to do with an
inverse Square law that has been refuted
the inverse Square law is a nice
heuristic it's an approximation to
reality in some way shape or form but
known to be false and yes in Papa's
conception sure Einstein general
relativity is an approximation to
reality as well we don't know how it's
false we expect it to turn out a false
we can't say it will turn out false as
incorrectly implied in this text because
we don't know for sure or anything
including that we're going to find the
successor we hope to we're trying hard
to we expect there must be because you
know the theory of gravity general
relativity just doesn't comport properly
with quantum theory all that's missed
all this context all the richness of the
history of Science and the philosophy of
science science itself and actual
physics it's all missed here this is a
fictitious story about how science works
it's got nothing that makes no contact
with what's really going on science is
not merely about predictions the orbit
of mercury is not explained by explained
I'll just predicted explained by Newton
it's explained best explained only so
far as we know by Einstein general
relativity by the curvature is based on
and whatever the successor is whatever
the successor is we don't expect it to
go back to being forces anyway the
author goes on Einstein did not refute
the laws of Newton just as Newton did
not refute the laws of Kepler in both
cases the truth of the earlier theory
was presupposed and then a more general
theory was developed that applied within
an expanded context of knowledge and in
both cases the expanded context of
knowledge included small discrepancies
between new data and the old Theory
which were then explained by the new
Theory this is often how science
progresses end quote that is completely
false Einstein did not assume Newton
true and taken further as was just
claimed there that the the truth of the
earlier theory was not presupposed the
truth of the earlier theory was I say
again that there was a force there was
this Force this pull this attraction and
in fact it moved instantaneously through
space which is a problem that was only
solved shown to be unnecessary false by
the existence of a new explanation doing
away with the need for forces and
instantaneous action or distance
Einstein did not assume Newton true he
from the ground up changed the
foundations of what gravity time and
space were the poverty of the analysis
in this book is absolutely striking it's
a very desperate attempt by someone who
knows something about the history of
physics to salvage induction they are
dogmatically wedded to objectivist
epistemology they need for whatever
reason to salvage it from well I guess
to some extent the influence of Papa or
wider understandings of the history of
science they need to try and Salvage it
but they can only do so by literally
butchering the history and the science
it's true desperation but the author
goes on quote there is only one aspect
of Newton's theory that was rejected
rather than absorbed into Einstein's
theory and in this case one can only
wish that Einstein had been consistent
in his rejection Newton treated the
concepts space and time as existence
independent of bodies rather than as
relationships among bodies thus he
viewed space as an infinite Cosmic
backdrop that exists independent of the
bodies placed in it and he claimed that
this backdrop has real physical effects
on the bodies that accelerate with
respect to it Newton offered scientific
arguments to support his viewers space
and time but these arguments are
non-sequiturs absolutely loot space and
time played no role in the reasoning
that proved his theory thus I had no
need to mention these ideas while
presenting his Discovery process in fact
absolute space and time were intimately
connected to Newton's religious views
and therefore they are an arbitrary
element in his theory end quote
[Laughter]
we were just saying well Newton was
religious and so this is why he had this
vision of space and time but again that
is not it begins there by saying there
is only one aspect of Newton's theory
that was rejected rather than absorbed
in Einstein's theory and he's talking
about space and time no he's not no no
no no
Force we're at the gravitational force
the force of gravitation that that does
not feature an Einstein's theory it is
clear there is no Force there is no
action at a distance there are many
aspects of Newton's theory that don't
appear in Einsteins it is
laughable there's no mention of
eddington's experiment okay the idea
that Starlight bends more during a solar
eclipse than it does under Newton's
Theory falsifying refuting Newton's
Theory that's an egregious emission and
one might presume deliberate we can only
understand why Newton's theory is
strictly Wrong by recourse to
experiments like that or any of the
other countless observations as of this
date such as Mercury's orbit where it
makes the wrong prediction it is wrong
period full stop that's not just about
the wrong prediction it invokes invokes
mind you things in reality that don't
exist period full stop it's wrong
there's no mention of how the force of
gravity under Newton's Theory moved
instantaneously between bodies and that
was replaced by an influence from
Gravity this curvature space time that
was limited by the speed of light
there's no concern here about the
relativity of space and time rather than
being a fixed space and time of Newton
this doesn't happen absolute crucial
difference he tries to get there but he
says it's to do with religion or
something okay so enough of that there's
just not enough time to do that kind of
thing as you can see read all the books
with all the egregious errors in history
and science and misinterpretations of
Papa and can't read more on induction
this is it says there's just such a
Poverty of epistemology there it's root
and Branch false so this is me doing my
best so let me go back to Thomas picking
straight up from where I left off last
episode
Thomas goes on you're right it's quite
once one has a series of first level
Concepts that are generally identified
by referencing that which can be
observed in reality the reference and
the meaning of the concept one can then
use these Concepts together to make
sentences such as the above definition
of a cat and then he writes some more
I'm going to skip over so it's the same
sort of thing happens with bird snake
running with an abstraction from the
conceptualized animals that can run you
know technically speaking the above
definition of cat is formed from both
first level Concepts and higher level
Concepts and would not be the definition
given by a young child who may not yet
have the concepts of animal or
communication just pausing there
you don't need to have the concept of
animal or communication before you have
the concept of a cat that's just a
misconception again people have problem
situations the the the the child might
have no clue what an animal is and might
learn what a cat is first because there
might be a cat in the house and no other
animals might be one of the first things
they learn is the word cat and only
later they realize there are these other
things out there and much later than
that that all of these things fall under
the umbrella of animal you don't need
animal first to form the concept of cat
this is all cart before horse this is
all a complete misunderstanding of how
knowledge creation works and therefore
how Learning Works Thomas kind of admits
this he goes on to say at the early
stages of concept formation or using
Concepts and defining them a young child
with a small vocabulary or a point to
the household cat and say cat which is
an ostensive definition in this context
end quote which would in the mind of the
Child mean that that thing's a cat that
thing's a cat
are dogs cats now how do they how can
they rule out that a dog's on a cat what
do they understand you don't know what
they understand
cat to mean at that point they might not
either they just think it labels this
one thing that lives in their house
but the problem with this the problem
with this this way of talking about
philosophy at all Full Stop epistemology
full stop
is he's imagining something in his head
about this cat this kind of philosophy
is just so divorced from reality it's
not real philosophy I don't regard this
as real philosophy or epistemology at
all because not connected to problems it
is it's one of those situations where
people just go imagine this cigarette
like a trolley problem imagine this
situation imagine you're at home with
you know this child and the child who
points at something and there's a cat
you need to bring it back to what
actually happened in history or what
that's what actually is going on right
now in the history of ideas how
knowledge is creative this is not about
how biological knowledge is constructed
it's not about science it's not about
concept formation despite the fact he's
calling it that in fact it's about how
children learn language and about how
people Define words and insofar as it is
narrowly focused on how to define this
word cat well it doesn't even get that
right
cats and snakes and so on are biological
organisms knowledge of cats comes to us
in truth via biology
even when explaining to a child when
they have learned this word cat by a
process of guessing and then checking in
the way I've described earlier
eventually there comes a day when they
learn that thing on television or at the
zoo is called a lion
and that's a cat too and that can be
shocking to them because it looks
nothing like well it looks something
like but it doesn't exactly look like
the cat they've got at home or the other
cats they're saying so they begin
learning about big cats and then they
learn oh there's this whole class of
organisms that are actually
characterized by explanations coming
from biology
these things are carnivorous kind of
like dogs but instead most of them have
got retractable claws unlike dogs
although not all of them cheetah doesn't
have a retractable claw but these cats
they're they're apex predators and you
only find them in some places across the
world they accept domestic cats which
are actually some kind of exception to
the rule exception to everything else
that we know about cats because well
they don't usually look at something
like a human being as being a food
source
and if the child pursues this line of
questioning which is what happens they
just keep coming up with more questions
in other words more problems and if
they've assured long enough then they
get to a deep understanding from
explanatory science they will learn
about Evolution and genetics
those are the real explanations of cats
that's the real knowledge of cats and
how that knowledge is formed is not even
plausibly not even the slightest
to do with how a cat has supposedly this
or that thing that that jumps and meows
and and runs and so on evolution by
natural selection is genuine knowledge
as its knowledge of cats but Darwin did
not observe evolution by natural
selection it occurs over time scales of
thousands and millions of years
no one sees species evolve maybe
bacteria through a microscope but not
really Darwin formed the concept if you
like of evolution by natural selection
by guessing and then making predictions
and checking it was a whole Grand
explanation of reality not observed in
reality but merely checked for
consistency against it did it solve the
problems did it answer the questions
about why there are all these different
species knowledge the real stuff is
simply not about definitions it's not
about what a cat is defined as being in
the main it's about why some animals
count as cats or not why this class of
animals panthera lived in live in the
places they do and what they do their
evolutionary history and unique genetics
we must we must if we're doing
epistemology grapple with all this
philosophy and in particular
epistemology is not about the definition
of words but this is what Thomas is
implying this is what objectivism kind
of uh Hedges towards Thomas goes on to
say quote
so one makes observations mentally
abstracts out the similarities well I
have to sort of pause there end quote
you make observation you're mentally
abstract out or observe similarities
the question is how does it work how do
you mentally abstract out these
similarities from your observations how
does that work what is the role of
observation
again let's take it back to actual
reality for a moment
prior to the 1900s it was well known
that Newtonian gravity explained almost
everything moving under the influence of
gravity
apples fell rocks rolled down Hills
Tides went in and out and planets moved
across the sky
Newtonian gravity seemed perfect it was
knowledge now Newton did not look up and
see his inverse Square law of
gravitation
were knowledge creation that simple
we would not have needed to have waited
until the 1600s when Newton wrote his
principia to tell us he didn't have just
huge tables of data gathered about all
those things like Tides going in and out
and then extracted from that the inverse
Square law people would have observed
the real world and induced knowledge if
they could just look record some
observations and then write down the
inverse Square law but here's a deeper
problem prior to the 1900s for some
decades it was known that while the
theory Newton's Theory seemed perfect
and thus it earned the title of the law
of gravity Mercury just would not obey
it was a rebel each time the law was
applied Mercury simply appeared in a
place where it should not be according
to Newton's law of gravity astronomers
postulated hidden planets
gravitationally perturbing Mercury's
orbit they suggested Vulcan a mysterious
planet on the other side of the Sun to
Earth honor its orbit but behind the Sun
so beyond us at that time to observe but
that theory failed decades went by no
solution
it took Einstein to solve it but not by
observing Mercury over and over again
the solution to Mercury's usual orbital
characteristics did not come from
observing Mercury night after night and
generalizing or inducing it came from
Einstein in the first instance looking
at the mirrors and wondering about light
reflecting from that mirror it came from
Einstein considering magnetism and
electricity in their relationship and
how when the you know the negatively
charged objects in a magnetic field
repelled each other that when they were
made to move that force was different
and yet there shouldn't be because
whether the charges are moving or not
depends on one's frame of reference
Einstein was interested in time and
space and Light
and he was creative and after Decades of
considering all of those things
basically sitting at a desk and thinking
he developed special relativity
which had nothing to do with Mercury but
without it without special relativity
had never have gotten general relativity
and then without that no solution to
Mercury's orbit the knowledge of why
Mercury's orbit does what it does did
not come from Evermore observations
being generalized into some law or
induced from observations or anything
like that it wasn't extracted out of a
table of data of Mercury's positions
around the sun over time it came from
problems arising elsewhere and in the
mind of a physicist working on light and
magnetism and time and space and then
and only then was the solution to
Mercury's orbit revealed a manifestation
of the curvature of space-time but we
don't see that either it space-time it's
known to exist and also not known to be
observable in the usual sense of the
word we can't see it you can see its
effects prior to this space was just
another word for nothing it was another
word for emptiness for what's between
the actual stuff that exists but now we
know space is a complex fabric that can
buck and weave indeed so is time indeed
time and space are both manifestations
of the same more fundamental entity
space-time we know it exists it is
crucial in how Global Positioning
Systems work and why gravitational wave
detectors are a thing why neutron stars
and black holes exist and black holes
there's another thing we can never see
directly or observe only the effects but
we explain their existence because we
cannot observe them directly they appear
in our best explanations not because we
observe them but because the
explanations we create say they do and
Thomas goes on to another paragraph I'll
just read I'll give you a sense of what
he writes here The observed existence as
a unit to compare other similar
existence amidst the measurements and
unites the units in order to make the
abstraction a specific mental entity the
concept and this concept is open-ended
in the sense that the same concept would
apply to any future observations of
other things that are similar to the
first observed things that were
conceptualized such that those newly
observed similar existence can be
mentally incorporated into the
previously formed concept and so he goes
again my problem here is that this is
abstract philosophy it does not begin in
how does science or history work to
create knowledge it is just focused on
how words are defined or how we learn a
language there's a this ethereal thing
of concept formation but it gets all
that wrong anyway
we want to focus on epistemology so
let's skip down to something where he
almost gets to this quote from Thomas as
it turns out there are also first level
inductive generalizations that work
similar to first level Concepts in that
one can simply point to those aspects of
reality and then State the causative
generalization I.E flipping the light
switch turns on the lights or pushing
the ball gets it to roll or typing on a
keyboard displays alphanumeric
characters on a computer screen a first
level generalization is one in which the
causal sequence or relationship is given
in observation in other words for those
causal events observed causality is
given in observation requires a minimal
effort to extract out the relationship
end quote well which is it is it
requires minimal effort
or is it You observe the causality it
can't be both if you're observing the
causality if it's there that takes no
effort doesn't it he's saying minimal
effort now I would say causation is not
at all obvious not at all obvious
causality is a complex emergent
phenomena the law the laws of dynamical
that in fact put it this way the
dynamical laws of physics are time
symmetric this means that although we
observe the past causing events in the
future it's also equivalent to say the
future causes events in the past what am
I talking about well as a matter of
physics look a kettle is boiling why is
the water turning into steam well it's
because the heat Source determines that
the bonds between water molecules will
be broken
and they turn into a gas
but what determines that the heat source
is there well equivalently you can say
the heat Source must have been there
because the water turned into steam
only possible if the molecules of H2O
that the water is made of were broken at
some point in the past and they were
broken in the past because the heat
Source was determined to be there
determined why because the bonds of the
H2O were broken so the future has
determined the past determined the
existence of the heat Source in the past
given some future State the future
determines the past as the past
determines the future this is physics
according to deterministic laws
because the laws are time symmetric but
if you ignore physics and you ignore
science you get this stuff about
causation or messed up the concept of
causation is emergent because some
things are possible in the universe and
some things are impossible in the
universe
but not all possible things happen in
our universe why
because something must cause stuff to
happen so cause actually comes after
considering what's even possible
what is possible given the laws of
physics is logically prior to what
happens which is to say what has caused
to happen if you want to do fundamental
science epistemology and philosophy one
needs to appreciate this kind of thing
or else disconnecting physics from
philosophy means you again abstracting
philosophy into the realm of Reason
disconnected from reality reason is
powerful but it needs to be constrained
by reality we can reason our way to all
sorts of fallacious misconceptions for
example Euclid's elements were reasoned
into existence they make claims like
given two points on a sheet of paper a
single unique line can be drawn through
it just try it it is mathematically
obvious it is perfectly reasonable try
it to yourself draw any two points on a
sheet of paper now draw a straight line
through them how many straight lines can
you draw through them that's reason
there's your observation you've learned
something that Euclid did and his
followers did that's through any two
points only one unique straight line can
be drawn nevertheless
it's false and this is simple logic
simple logic that I'm about to show is
false basic mathematics and geometry
it's mistaken
all you need to do is to fold the piece
of paper and recognize now
how many multiple straight lines can be
drawn through it one needs to think in
more Dimensions than just two you could
punch a hole straight through one of the
holes you drew and out the other side
with a pencil the pencil itself now
serving as the straight line and you
might say oh that's cheating no that's
not what you meant or not what I meant
it is what I meant the point is that
even with my clear instructions you
misinterpreted things I spoke clearly
and reasonably in the way the issue is
put in almost every place it's false
there's no point now stamping your feed
and saying unfair I was tricked no
you're fallible communication is
fallible observation including
observation of my words is fallible and
knowledge is not obvious not easy to
come by it needs to be guessed and error
is everywhere but you've learned
something now hopefully and you know
better Papa can account for this Rand
and objectivism cannot okay Thomas goes
on to say quote this is a form of
induction that's presented by peakov and
Harry man in their works on induction
and it is important to point out that
the statement must be a statement of a
causal relationship and not just a
generalized observation that is not
connected to causation I.E all swans are
white it's not a proper or valid
causative generalization and so it is
not an inductive statement according to
Peak off at Harman because it is only
speaking in terms of identified causes
that one can be assured that are that
the conceptualized abstract inductive
generalization will apply to all members
of that causative class all swans are
white is only an identification of the
swans one has observed in the past but
since it is not causative in nature one
has no assurance that any future swans
will be want in fact historically they
were all thought to be white until some
black swans were found in other parts of
the world in other words it is by
identifying causes that one comes to
understand the world abstractly in terms
of scientific principles when other
types of historically considered
inductive statements would not discover
what the cause of the effect is and
would not provide any guidance as to
whether to be able to expect more of the
same relationship identified or not end
quote well to me that is just an
extremely torturous way of saying
induction is false we need a better way
and yet the cat example above that was
used simply represents the all swans are
white example it just adds that cats
have claws and feet and so on and where
you keep on adding things to that
there's no substantive difference
between the swans example and the cat's
example you need an explanation you can
consider my example of boiling water
www.brethall.org forward slash blog
forward slash induction in short what
that is is you take a beaker of water
you put it over a constant heat Source
like a stove you stick a thermometer in
it and then you take your data you graph
the temperature over time you know after
one minute the thing is 30 degrees
Celsius after two minutes it's 43
minutes it's 50 and so on you keep on
going after a certain number of minutes
you get to 90 degrees Celsius and then
you ask people to make a prediction
induction would happen that you make a
generalization right now on what basis
do you make this generalization well
unless you already have a theory but
where did you get the theory from not
observation obviously but unless you
have a theory you can't make a
generalization induction would have it
that you draw a straight line because
it's going up consistently and it does
it goes up in very close to a perfectly
straight line uh Trend every minute
you're getting another 10 degrees rise
so shouldn't It Go from 90 to 100 and
then from 100 to 110 from 110 to 120
that's what induction would say
inferring that the past resembles the
future inferring that you can get you
can derive from observations a concept
you can generalize you can
scientifically induce
but it's completely false it's not what
happens and you do a test and you find
out well actually at 100 degrees Celsius
the temperature ceases to rise the thing
boils the water boils and at its boiling
point temperature doesn't rise even
though it's still being heated so what's
going on well you actually need a
substantive scientific explanation
involving things like light and heat and
specific heat capacity and temperature
and all sorts of stuff and none of those
come from observation they guessed the
guests and you derive from that your
predictions you derive your predictions
but no amount of collecting data and
drawing lines is going to get you there
no pair of data of you know time and
temperature it allows you to extract out
from that water the idea that well at
100 something surprising happens
something surprising happens Thomas goes
on to say at the stage of first level
causative inductive generalizations
usually the concepts already exists one
has formed them previously end quote but
how so he's got well when you begin this
inductive process usually you begin with
Concepts that already exist where they
come from not by induction obviously
because you're explaining the inductive
process explaining the inductive process
by recourse to Concepts you already have
formed now Rand would sign and Rand
wants to say things like when you read
Ranch she goes well you have to begin
with axioms you have to begin with the
existence exists which is vacuous it's
not a genuine Axiom but she thinks from
that you can then begin
mathematically proving everything else
which is completely false it just
doesn't work it's beyond the scope of
this right now Thomas goes on it's what
what he's claiming to do is quote one is
simply relating Concepts to other
Concepts in a causative manner without
any further types of measurement
emission involved because the
measurement were already emitted when
one formed the original Concepts like
switch light ball rolling type in
computer screen were already formed
following the process of concept
formation stated above
end quote but the process of concept
formation was above let's recap what he
was saying earlier he said quote you
notice the similarities of various
things observed within a context or an
abstraction from the background which
requires a type of selective mental
focus and you unite the various
observations together by omitting
measurements while retaining the
differentiator concepts namely the
concept I the cat and then Define this
concept either by being able to point to
instances of those things which are
subsumed under the concept or in terms
of Concepts already created so as to
start building a conceptual hierarchy
end quote okay so putting aside for me
this is It's just almost impossible to
pass because of the idiosyncratic use of
jargon here measurements differentiated
characteristics
at no point do we get to know how the
concept is arrived at it's circular now
the questioner might ask the
objectivists you know what is concept
formation and the objective says well it
involves this process called induction
and the question will say what induction
how many objectives will say it's a
process of concept formation
by generalizing things from observing
particular instances into universal laws
into Concepts
and the question will say well how does
that work and the objectivist will say
well You observe a creature for example
has claws and fur and so on and you
thereby learn that all of these things
these instances are cats the questioner
will go but what about if You observe a
furry clawed creature with all those
characteristics it's not a cat like a
possum something new and the objectivist
Apparently says no no no that's not
induction that sounds more like an all
swans are white kind of thing which
isn't induction that's not what I'm
talking about concept formation is the
kind of induction I'm talking about oh
the question says well what's concept
formation
the objective it says well it involves
induction you see and the question that
says oh what's induction you can say I'm
in a circular argument at this point
which is exactly what this paper is it's
a it's a circular argument it says
concept formation is induction
induction is not this process where
you're just talking about all swans
being white given a certain number of
instances this ones it's not that it's
not as simple as that oh okay then what
is it well concept formation sort of
involves looking at these particulars
out in the world and you take all these
different particulars and you unite them
together you see and you you develop
Concepts from previous Concepts you've
got where did you get those previous
Concepts oh via this method of induction
this method of induction is where you go
out and you look at these generalized
features of the world all of which have
something in common you see and and then
you're able to form this concept and
this concept is a new piece of knowledge
that you've got but but but how did you
form the concept well from the from the
generalized instances but isn't that
like induction like the all swans a
white thing you're just saying all this
oh no no it's not what I'm talking I'm
talking about concept format you're in a
circle in this frustrating Circle where
you're not learning what concept
formation is you're just being told that
it's induction and then when you're
asked what induction is you're giving
been given the same story that
everyone's always been given about
induction that it's about observing
stuff repeatedly he goes on quote Thomas
says
from time to time New Concepts may have
to be formed to fully conceptualize the
inductive generalization end quote
so close almost correct he's got there
he's got it he's saying New Concepts
have to be formed
he can forget the word fully you're
going to say New Concepts have to be
formed to conceptualize the inductive
generalization but in fact you can
forget the induction the inductive bit
there now too so his sentence there
where he said quote from time to time
New Concepts may have to be formed to
fully conceptualize the inductive
generalization let's just change that
I'm going to get rid of this from time
to time I'm just going to say New
Concepts may have to be formed to
conceptualize the generalization and
then end quote then we get closer to the
truth that conceptualizes are fancy word
so you can do without that new Concepts
are formed and this allows
generalizations to be made that's what
we'd say under a preparing framework for
example the concepts of thermodynamics
and latent heat and particle theory
allow us to make a generalization like
water tends to boil at 100 degrees
Celsius at sea level understanding
conditions that's our general statement
there are exceptions and we can say why
but the generalization is not inductive
it's actually deductive it's a logical
consequence a deduction from a much
deeper theory about chemistry
thermodynamics and you know the concepts
of latent and specific heat and Thomas
goes on to say so after saying from time
to time New Concepts may have to be
fully formed to conceptualize the
generalization such as when one observes
that a changing electric current leads
to a fluctuating Magnet or Compass
placed near it end quote so that's good
we're seeing some kind of actual science
but it's very superficial very
superficial and imprecise yeah a change
in current and a wire can cause a
compass needle or or better a freely
moving magnet placed reasonably close to
it to move this was allstead's
experiment initially this is because of
a deeper law of physics that changing
electric currents or more precisely
moving electric charges generate
magnetic fields more precisely some sort
of flux change anyway these things
generate magnetic fields that's the
explanation The observed effect of
moving Compass needles is the
explicandom okay what we need to
understand and it's also a test of
theory or perhaps better regarded as a
demonstration of the effects but we
don't see electromagnetism we see moving
Compass needles but why Well that took
years to figure out indeed many
explanations have been purported and
give partial accounts today why
magnetism exists at all in the first
place it comes down to relativistic
effects and we don't observe those they
are not induced they were objections and
by Einstein initially he goes on to say
quote so concept formation can
definitely be involved in identifying a
given causal inductive generalization
but does not have to be involved the
concepts were already formed before
making the new observations end quote
well almost we can do away with this
whole shoehorning Inn of inductive
generalization there was no
generalization involved in Austin's
experiment he never generalized to
electromagnetism Faraday proposed it and
he said of his own theories I hold my
theories there on the tips of my fingers
so the nearest breath of fact could blow
them away end quote he understood
Faraday understood he explained
electromagnetism and he understood that
knowledge was conjectural
he got it he knew he did not derive or
induce generalizations from observations
he was guessing at the world not
guessing at true knowledge but useful
information about the world that solved
problems
it was a great guess that mere fact
could refute Thomas goes on quote with a
generalization one can have something
like flipping the switch turns on the
lights this would be a first level
generalization of the type spoken about
in peacock's course and in The Logical
leap end quote well The Logical leap the
leap is a conjecture it's a guess it
comes from within it can't come from
without nothing is leaping out there in
the world it's leaping within this
logical leap leaping from a problem to a
solution or a purported solution a guess
and an observation may be a problem or a
mistake observations are faster than
light neutrinos of the Large Hadron
Collider wood according to an
objectivist picture mean we've observed
that Einstein's wrong as his theory was
that nothing can move through space
faster than light only popper
understands it's all interpretation it's
all theory-laden observations not that
as simple you don't just observe the
facts of reality you don't observe
neutrinos moving faster than light you
don't observe Compass needles moving you
don't just observe trees and in the case
of the neutrinos what was actually seen
was an error they only appeared to move
faster than light because the equipment
was faulty we only appeared to observe
something about reality we didn't
actually observe reality those
scientists who observe apparently
observe that thing retracted their paper
it was an error it turned out nothing
went faster than light a mistake with
cables or something so too with the sky
is blue that's just a manner of talking
the sky appears to be blue the sky
appears to exist there is no Sky it is
not a substance it is not a thing we can
see we are seeing sunlight scattered by
molecules of air towards the ground and
the blue photons get scattered the most
we see that and say the sky is blue
observation is theory-laden we see a
thing and we say oh look a tree and then
the guide at the botanic gardens tell
tells us sure that looks like a tree
doesn't it appearances can be deceiving
now observation won't tell you but
that's actually a red flowering Maple
and now if you look at that what you
thought was a tree towering above you
and you've just heard you know the
botanic gardens guide say Maple and you
know Maple is a tree and you're a pretty
dogmatic let's say objectivists and
that's just a stupid Gardener but then
they go on to explain the difference
botanically speaking between shrubs and
trees but you tune out because you think
well my senses have given me reliable
knowledge and you kind of refuse to
admit you're wrong you still go on
thinking but no when I look at something
and I see a tree I know it's a tree I
know a tree when I see it damn it this
is one of those edge cases I've heard
about perhaps but basically the idea is
I see the facts of reality I observe the
facts of reality if I'm looking at a
tree I know it's a tree because I can
just see a tree
who cares about shrubs well this is the
problem this is the problem with
objectivist ways of thinking you might
even do the same thing when it comes to
epistemology you might notice that there
are severe errors with objectivist
epistemology you might hear about
something better like preparing
epistemology but you're going to treat
it like a trip to the botanic gardens
where the the botanist who's guiding you
are saying that looks for all the world
like a tree but in fact technically
speaking not a tree it's a shrub and you
can stamp your feed all day and you can
say no this isn't one of those cases
that completely refutes my epistemology
if my epistemology comes down to you see
the facts of reality You observe the
facts of reality if you're looking at a
tree then you're observing a tree and
that's the fact about reality not
realizing you could be mistaken about
something as simple as a tree because
not everything that looks like a tree is
a tree some shrubs look like trees and a
shrub isn't a tree and that is actually
is actually a refutation of your claim
you don't understand what a tree truly
is so I'm going to move a little bit
more quickly and just pick up some
things where I think you know kind of
Thomas gets a few things almost right he
says at one point inductive
generalizations are open-ended in much
the same way that concepts are
open-ended they relate to many different
instances of conceptualized inductive
generalization end quote so yeah
open-ended that's good that's right it
also means again that observation does
not come first it's open-ended we can
make infinite progress precisely because
we begin with problems if we don't have
a problem again we're just going about
like moving through the world and not
worrying about how knowledge works but
then if you do see something that makes
no sense then you've got a problem now
it could be your idea your idea could be
wrong about say what trees are or what
relativity says or what is possible
about speed or it might be you are wrong
that you even made the observation you
thought that was a tree but you were
wrong you thought you saw particles
going faster than line but that was
wrong the theory might be wrong or your
observation might be wrong or both might
be wrong because you're fallible the
point is knowledge cannot be gotten from
Mere observations here that gets you
nowhere you need the conjecture and it's
not inducing inducing from what not
observations other knowledge no
because no existing Theory might work it
didn't for Einstein it needed to be
literally created how's that done well
we don't know exactly if we did know we
could write an algorithm for it and then
program it like a recipe into a dumb
computer so that those dumb computers
could be smart computers and then they
could do this knowledge creation stuff
all we know is that we do create
knowledge so we must when we encounter a
problem one day we'll know how just not
yet when we do we'll program computers
to be just like us who can also explain
stuff generate explanatory knowledge and
Thomas goes on he says quote but notice
that just as one has a unit that serves
as a standard in concept formation a any
given dog can be used as a standard for
the concept of dog one can keep the
whole causal sequence in mind of turning
on lights such that any given means of
turning on light can be used as a unit
that serves as a standard to make
further integrated observations such
that when one comes across some unique
way of switching on lights one doesn't
have to start from scratch and
reconceptualize the causal sequence end
quote well okay but where did the causal
sequence come from in the first place or
knowledge of the causal sequence come
from the first place this is all too
simplistic too abstract too disconnected
from actual Big Ideas and proper
explanations in the history of Science
and problems in science and anywhere
else it's just not a big problem how the
term dog is defined or how lights are
switched on the concept or explanation
of what a dog is for example is not the
same kind of thing as what the
dictionary definition of what a dog is
the real Knowledge from which the
definition is derived involves Grand
theories of biology canines and
speciation that goes to Evolution and
even genetics in the end if a child
quite reasonably asks you as they often
do who spend some time with a young
child but why but why but why each time
you give them a deeper understanding of
some question then beginning with dog
what is a dog you'll eventually get to
Evolution you won't go through the
skiing or anything like it that Thomas
is talking about here again talk to a
kid sometime really understand what's
going on they don't want a simple
definition they don't want to be told
when they're asked what's that that's a
dog what's a dog a dog has fur and Barks
and has four legs and look those are the
dogs and look here are examples of dogs
no they will have more questions they
might see a three-legged dog they might
want to know why wolves and hyenas are
not dogs and more besides either they
will get bored their questions will
continue to be answered until such time
as they no longer have any problems they
have none left they've exhausted all
their questions or if you're any good
you will keep on answering and you will
indeed end up with a lack of answers
yourself or you'll end up in
evolutionary biology and you may
eventually get to a point where you say
that's all I know or in fact that's all
anyone knows for now and you can say
people never stop learning stuff but
this is all I've learned so far maybe we
can learn more by doing some research
ourselves together let's go on the
Internet or maybe you can learn how this
Evolution stuff really works better
because I don't understand it's kind of
our job as people to keep on learning
more and more and solving all these
kinds of problems about what dogs are
and stuff it's a lot of fun isn't it
lucky that we can do it because the poor
old dog over there it doesn't even know
what it is and it can't learn anything
so we have to learn and the child might
ever ask why can't they learn why can't
a dog learn this and then you'll say aha
well now you're asking about what people
are and you're asking about something
called knowledge and epistemology but at
that point you're asking about how we
know stuff and hopefully you won't go
into mentioning fancy words like maybe a
piece etymology and certainly you
weren't going to mentioning jargonistic
words like inductive generalization or
induction at all
stick with guesses not just because all
kids understand what a guess is but
because it's also actually true when it
comes to how knowledge is generated
let's guess let's guess what a dog is
does it can a dog have two legs well
usually not okay does a dog like to eat
plants well usually not can a can a dog
talk well usually not and here's why and
then you use the word check let's check
that let's do a little test outside this
is called an experiment let's check on
the internet maybe someone else has
checked before we can check what they
said guesses and checks guess and check
that's how it works that's how it all
works Thomas goes on
then I won't read all of this he says
things such as I'm expanding on the idea
of a unit that serves as a standard and
applying this to generalization
scientific induction and philosophical
induction Each of which deals with that
particular causal sequence or specific
types instead of just retaining one item
at a time like one does with Concept
formation and having one thing as the
unit that serves as standard the
entirety of a causal sequence can be
retained and can be used as a unit that
serves as a standard for any further
understanding of similar causal
sequences
and he goes on and he's just repeating
the stuff about generalizations and
causal sequences and and
Concepts and it's just it's not
explanatory it's a it's list after list
and statement after statement of jargon
it's repetitious it's not adding
anything there are no examples here
importantly to talk about nothing from
real life no instance is put forth
nothing from science or the history of
ideas where it has worked or where it
could work we need to be Concrete in
philosophy we need to not be abstract
sometimes unavoidable to be abstract but
only after we've dealt with the
concretes dealt with the actual problems
that are out there he goes on to say
let's just pick up because I just you
know pick up a bit where he actually
mentions something to do with science he
says
in the case of electromagnetism the
scientific principles or inductive
generalizations were well known for
electricity and others for magnetism but
with a bit more observations it was
found that they could integrate these
two into a broader generalization that
are changing electric field leads to a
magnetic field and conversely a changing
magnetic field leads on electric field
end quote it wasn't just observations
again you're not just observing this
stuff and going oh now I conclude
electromagnetism and the laws of
electromagnetism that is far from the
truth you're not you're not getting the
Lords of electromagnet this is the key
thing
yeah sure you can do allstead's
experiment put it put an electric
current suddenly through a bit of wire
and yeah it's going to move a magnet
around
from that it doesn't matter how many
times you do that you're not going to
get the laws of electromagnetism nothing
about that's going to give you Faraday's
law of induction it's not going to give
you ampers law lenses law rents Force
law nothing like that nothing you have
to have a problem and then start
properly measuring stuff and then
conjecturing these ideas he says quote
one makes observations mentally isolates
out the observations forms an
abstraction end quote makes observations
and forms an abstraction
mentally isolates out from the
observations this abstraction how
why is one observing the flicking of
switches by the way who has ever learned
this way
again here's what actually happens in a
household the light goes on the child
thinks very all in life early on in life
perhaps when there's still an infant
perhaps when they're still a baby how
did they happen they're surprised
they're not they haven't got words at
this point presumably but they're
they're surprised and they Wonder well
the light just went on that's
interesting they guess it's when mum
walks in the room because those two
things appear to happen together the
light goes on mum appears the light just
appears maybe they just think mum's
doing it mum's doing it but how but then
that notice they hear mum first and she
always goes to one place in the room
then the light goes on then maybe once
or twice more they hear a click as the
light goes on aha there she is finally
next time they get it more or less there
she is there's that thing on the wall
all the guesses come together the light
goes on has something to do with this
thing over there on the wall that she
touches ah then at some point much later
on they learn the language they learn
this word switch there is none there is
none of this stuff observe the switch
over and over again no it's a problem
people have including babies we learn a
lot inexplicitly without being able to
put it into words my guess is as infants
who cannot speak they know stuff like
this they know how light switches work
and heaps more besides they can't
articulate it so often they cry when
they want something it's also it's it's
all they have all this all they have to
communicate is to cry and except for
baby talk I I personally have a strange
memory of being a very young child maybe
only about four years old myself I could
barely speak or suppose and my youngest
brother I could only just speak the you
know small vocabulary myself and my
youngest brother was still still a
pre-verbal baby but I remember even now
today I remember completely
understanding him then his baby talk his
gurgling or his babbling it wasn't
English but it was some kind of
communication some baby language how did
I understand him I don't know how now
I've forgotten I just remember I
remember I could translate what he was
saying as if at the time I had not
forgotten the inarticulate baby talk I
was in that transition phase between
baby talk and knowing how to talk as a
as a grown person it's strange for me to
think back now but is the reason I
simply know babies know a lot of stuff
they can ask for stuff and eventually
they can ask for stuff in English but
they can actually ask before that too
long before that long before they can
talk they have needs and wants and they
they they they they they want to
communicate they can't quite they can
try and so you have to look carefully at
a baby at how it's trying to get the
message across and they learn not by
observation but by having a problem
guessing a solution and only then by
observing which is the check they do
against their guesses already made
knowledge comes from within checked
without checked from without and then it
exists out there solving problems as
theories and books and objects and
things like Bridges and Rockets okay
this has gone on for a long time so I'm
just skipping a lot of other parts of
this then I'm going to go to Just
specifically the areas where he tries to
talk science so he's says quote to get
the relationship that force is equal to
mass times acceleration f equals m a one
would have to measure the force exerted
on the object the mass of the object and
the acceleration of the object for each
instance of one's observations end quote
so this is completely false I mean more
than anything else you know we can
refute objectivism if this is what
objectivist epistemology is this is it
this is the the cut and dried example of
how it's just simply false no one does
that no one ever has done that a better
way of expressing f equals m a by the
way is to regard a the acceleration as a
change in velocity we may ask why is the
velocity of some Mass changing but then
we have mass times the change in
velocity but mass times a velocity is
momentum so now we have a new question
why does the momentum of something
change well the answer is because a
force is applied how does the force on
something change the momentum exactly
well the second law tells us that the
momentum of an object changes in
proportion to the force applied the
problem with f equals m a is that it
assumes M and I are constants but they
aren't except in simple Junior High
School examples there are situations
like rockets where the fuel has mass so
the mass changes as the fuels consume so
what happens is there that the velocity
increases at an increasing rate F might
be constant in that case because the
thrust of the rocket is but both M and V
are changing so therefore a changes as
well the acceleration all of this is an
explanation of why f equals m a in terms
of more simple Concepts like velocity
which is itself explained in terms of
position and time and M Mass what is
mass well this is what science is a
series of questions and problems and
solutions explanations the laws of
physics of which f equals m a is one
very poor representation of Newton's
second law of motion are explanations of
reality we don't observe couplings of
masses and accelerations out there in
the world and infer forces or F's indeed
if we tried doing that we'd never
strictly get f equals m a at all because
friction exists in our world
imperfection exists in our world
Newtonian mechanics has f equals m a as
a conclusion a theorem following from
deeper assumptions that's how it arrived
at but again you need to know physics
properly and you need to understand the
history of physics to fully account for
this what problem was mutant solving
even in the physics classroom we're not
looking at couplings of f m and a to
induce f equals ma we often what's done
is we're looking at pulleys and
pendulums and realizing f equals m a is
required as part of the explanation but
Thomas goes on and he actually provides
you know you'd need to have F1 M1 A1 F2
M2 A2 F3 m303 each of their own
measurements and then you'd conclude at
the end of that f equals m a which again
is just the all swans are white thing
you know I'm observing this one this one
this one this one they're all white
swans therefore all swans are white what
he's saying is I'm observing F1 F2 F3
I'm observing f equals m a f equals m a
f equals m a f equals m a and therefore
I'm observing f equals m a okay I'm
observing this instance of f equals m a
and words what he's saying is you're
told f is eight m is 2 and a is four
okay there's one Trio and then you're
told f equals ten well m is two and a is
five or F is 20 while m is 5 and a is
four now guess the relationship well
you've just been told you know three
instances of where f equals m a so of
course you're going to conclude f equals
m a all swans are white again all swans
are white again and so terribly wide of
the mark so terribly white of the mark
What observations of that sort gave us
general relativity
the laws of gravity the actual laws no
one was collecting numbers and deriving
the field equations of general
relativity after what numbers would that
have been you know how would you guess
those relationships anyway I can guess f
equals m a given three numbers but
that's just algebra it's not science
science is messy only a non-scientist
would ever come up with an idea like
that about how f equals ma was arrived
at but just do the actual experiment by
the way do the experiment in a high
school physics lab it's really hard
really hard you barely get pairs that
match that at all there's so much
friction all the time you need computers
at Best and motion detectors and all
sorts of stuff and you have more
complicated equations with pulleys and
trolleys and a more complex version of
the law f equals ma by the way which
only falls out at the end as a
conclusion after much explanation of
manipulation if it was as obvious as
Thomas is assuming here why did we have
to wait for Newton why didn't the
Babylonians and the Egyptians and I
didn't cave people have f equals ma or
any other scientist for that matter
because we can't observe the facts of
reality we can't observe f equals m a
out there but it carries on in the same
vein for more of this and I'm just going
to skip over all of that and he gets to
coming to his conclusion he says again
quote Aristotle defined induction as the
process of reasoning from the
observation of concretes or individuals
to a general or Universal conclusion
I've tried to show that there are
definitely times where one has to put
considerable thought into deciding if
two or more observed things belong in
the same concept or not end quote or in
other words Aristotle's definition of
induction which is just induction as
understood throughout history doesn't
work and Thomas has noticed that but he
tries to salvage the term nonetheless in
doing so he's confused about the process
of knowledge creation like happily
popper has done all the work and so
that's why objectivists would benefit
from Reading Pop Bar not just saying
well Rand was a right about everything
so what what she must have meant about
induction is this let's we've got to
save this because Rand used the word
let's save induction but it's a dead end
[Laughter]
Thomas says quote I think I have shown
that concept formation generalization
scientific induction and philosophical
induction have all enough components
that they are similar that these can be
integrated into one concept of induction
end quote no he hasn't accomplished this
at all induction doesn't work even his
attempt to show it when science is just
saying that it's the same old thing of
you know various trios of F's and M's
and A's can lead you to concluding f
equals Ma just the same as observing
whites one after White Swan can lead you
to the conclusion that all swans are
white this doesn't work and by the way
science and philosophy are domains of
knowledge and explanation not
predictions of that sort not just
generalizations they begin with problems
and the odds for all of observation is
to decide between competing knowledge
claims that's the point of it that is as
far as I can tell a comprehensive
analysis of the objectivist view of
induction as filtered through a fan and
one might very well say a scholar and
expert in
Iran's objectivism specifically the
objectivist epistemology Thomas miovis
Junior and so I think I've done as much
justice as I can to the paper I think
this counts as a refutation of the
foundational claims of inductivist
epistemology
and I hope I hope the the objectivists
um read read a little bit of pop-up okay
it doesn't mean that you have to reject
all of Rand
and even if Rand herself says words the
effect that you know everything else is
built on the epistemology on the
ontology on axioms like existence exists
you know something like that it doesn't
mean you have to follow with it you can
preserve the good stuff you can keep the
good stuff because it actually solves a
problem and the pop hearing framework
something like you know the virtue of
selfishness let's say
um capitalism the unknown ideal these
works and the content in these Works
solve problems
utterly independent of what she says
about epistemology I don't need to be
built on a foundation of epistemology
and that's another story we don't
believe in foundations because you don't
need them I believe and believe either
but until next time bye-bye
[Music]
foreign